I kappa B beta acts to inhibit and activate gene expression during the inflammatory response
The activation of pro-inflammatory gene programs by nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B) is primarily regulated through cytoplasmic sequestration of NF-kappa B by the inhibitor of kappa B (I kappa B) family of proteins(1). I kappa B beta, a major isoform of I kappa B, can sequester NF-kappa B in the cytoplasm(2), although its biological role remains unclear. Although cells lacking IkBb have been reported(3,4), in vivo studies have been limited and suggested redundancy between I kappa B alpha and I kappa B beta(5). Like I kappa B alpha, I kappa B beta is also inducibly degraded; however, upon stimulation by lipopolysaccharide (LPS), it is degraded slowly and re-synthesized as a hypophosphorylated form that can be detected in the nucleus(6-11). The crystal structure of I kappa B beta bound to p65 suggested this complex might bind DNA(12). In vitro, hypophosphorylated I kappa B beta can bind DNA with p65 and c-Rel, and the DNA-bound NF-kappa B:I kappa B beta complexes are resistant to I kappa B alpha, suggesting hypophosphorylated, nuclear I kappa B beta may prolong the expression of certain genes(9-11). Here we report that in vivo I kappa B beta serves both to inhibit and facilitate the inflammatory response. I kappa B beta degradation releases NF-kappa B dimers which upregulate proinflammatory target genes such as tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). Surprisingly, absence of I kappa B beta results in a dramatic reduction of TNF-alpha in response to LPS even though activation of NF-kappa B is normal. The inhibition of TNF-alpha messenger RNA (mRNA) expression correlates with the absence of nuclear, hypophosphorylated-I kappa B beta bound to p65:c-Rel heterodimers at a specific kappa B site on the TNF-alpha promoter. Therefore I kappa B beta acts through p65:c-Rel dimers to maintain prolonged expression of TNF-alpha. As a result, I kappa B beta(-/-) mice are resistant to LPS-induced septic shock and collagen-induced arthritis. Blocking I kappa B beta might be a promising new strategy for selectively inhibiting the chronic phase of TNF-alpha production during the inflammatory response.
