Snowball Earth termination by destabilization of equatorial permafrost methane clathrate
The start of the Ediacaran period is defined by one of the most severe climate change events recorded in Earth history - the recovery from the Marinoan 'snowball' ice age, similar to 635 Myr ago ( ref. 1). Marinoan glacial- marine deposits occur at equatorial palaeolatitudes(2), and are sharply overlain by a thin interval of carbonate that preserves marine carbon and sulphur isotopic excursions of about 25 and 115 parts per thousand, respectively(3-5); these deposits are thought to record widespread oceanic carbonate precipitation during postglacial sea level rise(1,3,4). This abrupt transition records a climate system in profound disequilibrium(3,6) and contrasts sharply with the cyclical stratigraphic signal imparted by the balanced feedbacks modulating Phanerozoic deglaciation. Hypotheses accounting for the abruptness of deglaciation include ice albedo feedback(3), deep- ocean out- gassing during post- glacial oceanic overturn(7) or methane hydrate destabilization(8-10). Here we report the broadest range of oxygen isotope values yet measured in marine sediments ( -25 parts per thousand to +12 parts per thousand) in methane seeps in Marinoan deglacial sediments underlying the cap carbonate. This range of values is likely to be the result of mixing between ice- sheet- derived meteoric waters and clathrate- derived fluids during the flushing and destabilization of a clathrate field by glacial meltwater. The equatorial palaeolatitude implies a highly volatile shelf permafrost pool that is an order of magnitude larger than that of the present day. A pool of this size could have provided a massive biogeochemical feedback capable of triggering deglaciation and accounting for the global postglacial marine carbon and sulphur isotopic excursions, abrupt unidirectional warming, cap carbonate deposition, and a marine oxygen crisis. Our findings suggest that methane released from low- latitude permafrost clathrates therefore acted as a trigger and/ or strong positive feedback for deglaciation and warming. Methane hydrate destabilization is increasingly suspected as an important positive feedback to climate change(11-13) that coincides with critical boundaries in the geological record(14,15) and may represent one particularly important mechanism active during conditions of strong climate forcing.
