Minority spin condensate in the spin-polarized superfluid He-3 A(1) phase
The magnetic properties of He-3 in its various phases originate from the interactions among the nuclear spins(1). The spin-polarized 'ferromagnetic' superfluid He-3 A(1) phase(2) ( which forms below 3 mK between two transition temperatures, T-c1 and T-c2, in an external magnetic field) serves as a material in which theories of fundamental magnetic processes and macroscopic quantum spin phenomena may be tested. Conventionally, the superfluid component of the A(1) phase is understood(3-6) to contain only the majority spin condensate, having energetically favoured paired spins directed along the external field and no minority spin condensate having paired spins in the opposite direction. Because of difficulties in satisfying both the ultralow temperature and high magnetic field required to produce a substantial phase space, there exist few studies of spin dynamics phenomena that could be used to test the conventional view of the A(1) phase. Here we develop a mechanical spin density detector that operates in the required regime, enabling us to perform measurements of spin relaxation in the A(1) phase as a function of temperature, pressure and magnetic field. Our mechanical spin detector is based in principle on the magnetic fountain effect(7); spin-polarized superfluid motion can be induced both magnetically and mechanically, and we demonstrate the feasibility of increasing spin polarization by a mechanical spin filtering process. In the high temperature range of the A(1) phase near T-c1, the measured spin relaxation time is long, as expected(2,8,9). Unexpectedly, the spin relaxation rate increases rapidly as the temperature is decreased towards T-c2. Our measurements, together with Leggett - Takagi theory(5), demonstrate that a minute presence of minority spin pairs is responsible for this unexpected spin relaxation behaviour. Thus, the long-held conventional view(2) that the A(1) phase contains only the majority spin condensate is inadequate.
