F-box protein FBXO31 mediates cyclin D1 degradation to induce G1 arrest after DNA damage
In response to DNA damage, eukaryotic cells initiate a complex signalling pathway, termed the DNA damage response (DDR), which coordinates cell cycle arrest with DNA repair. Studies have shown that oncogene-induced senescence, which provides a barrier to tumour development, involves activation of the DDR(1-3). Using a genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) screen, we have identified 17 factors required for oncogenic BRAF to induce senescence in primary fibroblasts and melanocytes(4). One of these factors is an F-box protein, FBXO31, a candidate tumour suppressor encoded in 16q24.3, a region in which there is loss of heterozygosity in breast, ovarian, hepatocellular and prostate cancers(5-9). Here we study the cellular role of FBXO31, identify its target substrate and determine the basis for its growth inhibitory activity. We show that ectopic expression of FBXO31 acts through a proteasome-directed pathway to mediate the degradation of cyclin D1, an important regulator of progression from G1 to S phase, resulting in arrest in G1. Cyclin D1 degradation results from a direct interaction with FBXO31 and is dependent on the F-box motif of FBXO31 and phosphorylation of cyclin D1 at Thr 286, which is known to be required for cyclin D1 proteolysis. The involvement of the DDR in oncogene-induced senescence prompted us to investigate the role of FBXO31 in DNA repair. We find that DNA damage induced by gamma-irradiation results in increased FBXO31 levels, which requires phosphorylation of FBXO31 by the DDR-initiating kinase ATM. RNAi-mediated knockdown of FBXO31 prevents cells from undergoing efficient arrest in G1 after gamma-irradiation and markedly increases sensitivity to DNA damage. Finally, we show that a variety of DNA damaging agents all result in a large increase in FBXO31 levels, indicating that induction of FBXO31 is a general response to genotoxic stress. Our results reveal FBXO31 as a regulator of the G1/S transition that is specifically required for DNA damage-induced growth arrest.
