Polarized release of T-cell-receptor-enriched microvesicles at the immunological synapse
The recognition events that mediate adaptive cellular immunity and regulate antibody responses depend on intercellular contacts between T cells and antigen-presenting cells (APCs)(1). T-cell signalling is initiated at these contacts when surface-expressed T-cell receptors (TCRs) recognize peptide fragments (antigens) of pathogens bound to major histocompatibility complex molecules (pMHC) on APCs. This, along with engagement of adhesion receptors, leads to the formation of a specialized junction between T cells and APCs, known as the immunological synapse(2), which mediates efficient delivery of effector molecules and intercellular signals across the synaptic cleft(3). T-cell recognition of pMHC and the adhesion ligand intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) on supported planar bilayers recapitulates the domain organization of the immunological synapse(4,5), which is characterized by central accumulation of TCRs(5), adjacent to a secretory domain(2), both surrounded by an adhesive ring(4,5). Although accumulation of TCRs at the immunological synapse centre correlates with T-cell function(4), this domain is itself largely devoid of TCR signalling activity(5,6), and is characterized by an unexplained immobilization of TCR-pMHC complexes relative to the highly dynamic immunological synapse periphery(4,5). Here we show that centrally accumulated TCRs are located on the surface of extracellular microvesicles that bud at the immunological synapse centre. Tumour susceptibility gene 101 (TSG101)(6) sorts TCRs for inclusion in microvesicles, whereas vacuolar protein sorting 4 (VPS4)(7,8) mediates scission of microvesicles from the T-cell plasma membrane. The human immunodeficiency virus polyprotein Gag co-opts this process for budding of virus-like particles. B cells bearing cognate pMHC receive TCRs from T cells and initiate intracellular signals in response to isolated synaptic microvesicles. We conclude that the immunological synapse orchestrates TCR sorting and release in extracellular microvesicles. These microvesicles deliver transcellular signals across antigen-dependent synapses by engaging cognate pMHC on APCs.
